Let’s start with the access switches.
Switch 3 and switch 4 are not going to do Inter-VLAN routing
these are gonna be configured as a layer 2 switches
so I should change the symbol of these switches to be simple Ethernet switches.
They are simply going to be layer 2 switches
that provide connectivity to the rest of the network.
So change this symbol of both the switches.
They will have 1 IP address configured
and that IP address is only used for management purposes.
So the IP address configured on the switches is only
to allow telnet or SSH to the switches for management purposes
they're not going to do any kind of routing
user devices shouldn’t typically be able to ping
telnet or SSH to the access switches.
So on switch 3 conf t int vlan 1
This is known as a Switch Virtual Interface or SVI
if I type do show ip int brief on the switch
and scroll down, you can see that the SVI has been created
but it was shut down previously
when I did the command show ip int brief
the SVI interface was not created.
So by using the command int vlan 1
I've created this Switch Virtual Interface.
So IP address 10.1.100.3 subnet mask is gonna be /24
and I need to no shut the SVI
because by default its administratively down, type end ping
before I do a ping sh ip int brief
notice the interface is now up
so I should be able to ping myself 10.1.103 and I can.
So I'll save that config
and then I’ll go to switch 4
once again sh ip int brief
no SVI currently exist only the physical interfaces
int vlan 1 ip address
In this example, it will be 10.1.104
so IP address 10.1.104/24 mask no shut it, save the config
Interface VLAN 1 has come up as you can see over there.
Ping 10.1.100.3 ping succeeds.
The first ping failed because the switch had to do an arp
for the MAC address of switch 3
but notice switch 4 is now able to ping switch 3
and by the same token switch 3 is now able to ping switch 4.
So that’s a good sign because it means are links are up in a moment
I'll discuss CDP and LLDP or Cisco Discovery Protocol
and Link Layer Discover Protocol
I’ll show you how to check the connections between switches.
On switch 1 and switch 2
we need to configure multiple IP addresses
one per VLAN because these switches will be doing Inter-VLAN routing.
so on switch 1 sh ip int brief
at the moment no SVIs are configured
so int vlan 1 ip  address 10.1.101.255.255.0 no shut
int vlan 10 ip address 10.1.10.1/24 no shut
int vlan 20 or int vlan 20 rather
ip address 10.1.20.1/24 no shut
CTRL Z or CTRL ZED sh ip int brief
at the moment only VLAN 1 is up, VLAN 10 and VLAN 20 are down
and that’s because we don’t have any interfaces
configured in VLAN 10 or VLAN 20
I’m going to show you in a moment
how to explicitly configure these ports as trunk ports
and then we should see that those SVI's come up
now switch 2, sh ip int brief
no SVIs int v int vlan 1
ip address 10.1.100.2/24 no shut
int vlan 10 ip address 10.1.10.2/24 no shut
int vlan 20 ip address 10.1.20.2/24 no shut
and sh ip address int brief
Once again VLAN 1 is up VLAN 10 and VLAN 20 are down
and that’s once again because when we use the command
sh int g0/0 switchport as an example
you’ll notice that the port is configured for VLAN 1
but no other VLANs have been explicitly configured across this port.
The access VLAN is VLAN 1 by default if DTP or Dynamic Trunk Protocol
doesn’t negotiate with the other side to form a trunk
trunking a native VLAN is VLAN 1 by default.
So we only have interface VLAN 1 up, the other interfaces are down
but as that's our management VLAN were ok to use that for testing
so can switch 2 ping switch 1? Yes, it can.
Should be able to ping itself? Which it can, what about switch 3?
Yes, it can. What about switch 4? Yes, it can.
So we have IP connectivity in our network
the switches can ping each other
let’s do another test on switch 1, can it ping itself?
Yes, it can, can it ping switch 2? Yes, it can.
switch 3? Yes, it can, switch 4? Yes, it can and I’ll save the config.
So we’ve configured IP addresses on the switches.
Can this switches ping router 3 which is in the management VLAN?
so on switch 1 once again ping 10.1.100.253, 253 rather, yes, it can.
so switch 1 can ping this IP address of router 3.
Now these routers acting as PCs are gonna be put into separate VLANs.
So we'll do the pinging when we configure those devices in a separate VLAN.
At  the moment we haven’t got VLAN 10 configured properly in the networks
so we can't test connectivity between our PCs and the switches.